feat: AppArmor confinement for codejail-service (#109)
edx/devstack: docs/codejail.rst

Codejail service
################

The ``codejail`` devstack component (codejail-service) requires some additional configuration before it can be enabled. This page describes how to set it up and debug it.

Background
**********

Both LMS and CMS can run Python code submitted by instructors and learners in order to implement custom Python-graded problems. By default this involves running the code on the same host as edxapp itself. Ordinarily this would be quite dangerous, but we use a sandboxing library called `codejail <https://github.com/openedx/codejail>`__ in order to confine the code execution in terms of disk and network access as well as memory, CPU, and other resource limits. Part of these restrictions are implemented via AppArmor, a utility available in some Linux distributions (including Debian and Ubuntu).

> While AppArmor provides good protection, a sandbox escape could still be possible due to misconfiguration or bugs in AppArmor. For defense in depth, we're setting up a dedicated `codejail service <https://github.com/openedx/codejail-service>`__ that will perform code execution for edxapp and which will allow further isolation.

Reviewer: It may make sense to either change this to point to the README: https://github.com/openedx/codejail-service/blob/main/README.rst, and/or refer to reading those docs, rather than just noting the service.

> The default edxapp codejail defaults to unsafe, direct execution of Python code, and this remains true in devstack. We don't even have a way to run on-host codejail securely in devstack. In constrast, the codejail service refuses to run if codejail has not been configured properly, and we've included a way to run it in devstack.

Reviewer: [opinion] I'd leave most of this for the openedx/codejail-service docs. It's going to change even more if the old behaviour is DEPRed (including removal). Here, I'd write more from the perspective that we have and want a codejail-service, and here is what is needed to work with it.

This is non-blocking. It is an opinion to minimize future doc updates as time passes.

Note: I could imagine an ADR that captures this in the codejail-service, if that doesn't already exist, and you could point to it if you feel it is worth it, without surrounding it with much redundant text.

Author: Yeah, I'll go ahead and trim this down, and save what I wrote for when I write the docs for the app repo.

Configuration
*************

In order to run the codejail devstack component:

> 1. Install AppArmor: ``sudo apt install apparmor``

Reviewer: - Is this directly on my local machine (Mac, etc.)? Could you make that more explicit?
- Once I'm clear, I can run through this as well.

Author: Yes, it's meant to be run on the host machine. Although now I'm realizing that I'm not actually sure where you're supposed to run it on a Mac! It's a Linux command, and won't work for you.

How does this docker stuff all work on Mac, anyhow? Maybe there's a Linux VM that all the docker stuff runs inside? If so, this would need to be run in that Linux VM.

Reviewer: Maybe this will help us? https://github.com/abiosoft/colima/discussions/1019

Author: I don't see anything promising in there. My understanding is that Colima sets up an Ubuntu-based Linux VM and runs docker inside of that, and that to get this working on a Mac you'd have to access that VM directly and install apparmor (and this profile) inside of the VM. I see references on the web to `colima ssh`, which might help?

This is definitely going to be harder to run on a Mac.

2. Add the codejail AppArmor profile to your OS, or update it: ``sudo apparmor_parser --replace -W codejail.profile``
3. Configure LMS and CMS to use the codejail-service by uncommenting ``# ENABLE_CODEJAIL_REST_SERVICE = True`` in ``py_configuration_files/{lms,cms}.py``
4. Run ``make codejail-up``

The service does not need any provisioning, and does not have dependencies.

Development
***********

Changes to the AppArmor profile must be coordinated with changes to the Dockerfile, as they need to agree on filesystem paths.

> Any time you update the profile, you'll need to re-run the command to apply the profile.

Reviewer: I was wondering how to do this. Is the next paragraph the answer? If so, maybe either start the next paragraph with "To re-run the command to apply the profile...", or just make this one paragraph that goes together. Or, any other way to clarify what how you to this. Thanks.

Author: This was supposed to mean that the command to install the profile in the first place and the command to update it are one and the same. (It's the one with `--replace`.) It's a kind of confusing situation. I'll try to clarify the docs.

(Actually, I think you can use `--add` instead of `--replace`, but then every time afterwards you need to use `--replace`, which... I'd rather just use one command for both!)

> The profile file contains the directive ``profile codejail_service``. That defines the name of the profile when it is installed into the kernel. In order to change that name, you must first remove the profile **under the old name**, then install a new profile under the new name. To remove a profile, use the ``--remove`` action instead of the ``-replace`` action: : ``sudo apparmor_parser --remove -W codejail.profile``

Reviewer: Is there supposed to be a relationship between the name `codejail.profile` and the earlier `profile codejail_service`? Can you better explain the connection?

Author: Nope, filename is unrelated -- could be named anything. `profile codejail_service` is the important part. It tells apparmor to install a profile of this name in the OS.

Reviewer: I started the review with this doc, and I asked this before I had my bearings. I didn't realize that `codejail.profile` was a file under review as part of this PR. Maybe you could note earlier on where to find the file `codejail.profile`, and we can adjust the doc when and if it moves?

Author: What if I change this to `./codejail.profile`? That would help hint that it's a file in the repo.

> The profile name must also agree with the relevant ``security_opt`` line in devstack's ``docker-compose.yml``.

Reviewer: I'm not sure exactly what this means.
1. Is this whole section about changing the name meant to be instructions for a permanent name change/improvement, or a useful development technique? If so, maybe you could explain why and when you'd want to change the name.
2. It sounds like there might be certain steps to take when changing a name. For example, removing the old profile name. Do you need to do anything to add the new name, or does remove do everything you want? Do you then need to update the `security_opt` line? If so, this would be better written: "Next, you must update the relevant `security_opt` line...`. If this is not what you meant at all, maybe this is enough to show you my confusion with this line? I'm not clear when and if you are asking me to change something, and which side to change.

Author: It's basically supposed to be a warning that changing the name is not simple. I should probably replace this with something like "avoid changing the name, and here's why", and people can look up the process elsewhere if they need it. I'm hoping we can stick with this name and not change it.

Background
**********

The `codejail-service <https://github.com/openedx/codejail-service>`__ webapp is a wrapper around the `codejail <https://github.com/openedx/codejail>`__ library. See the READMEs of each repo for more information on the special requirements for deploying codejail, in particular the AppArmor-based sandboxing.

References to "codejail" can mean either the library or the service. In devstack, "codejail" usually refers to the service.

Configuration
*************

> **TODO**: These instructions are for Linux. We need some instructions for how to do this on Mac; it probably involves accessing the Linux VM that docker is run inside of.

Reviewer: How about something like this?
```suggestion
These instructions are for Linux only. Additional research would be required to create instructions for a Mac, which probably involves accessing the Linux VM that docker is run inside of.
```

In order to run the codejail devstack component:

1. Install AppArmor: ``sudo apt install apparmor``
2. Add the provided codejail AppArmor profile to your OS: ``sudo apparmor_parser --add -W ./codejail.profile``
3. Configure LMS and CMS to use the codejail-service by uncommenting ``# ENABLE_CODEJAIL_REST_SERVICE = True`` in ``py_configuration_files/{lms,cms}.py``
4. Run ``make codejail-up``

The service does not need any provisioning, and does not have dependencies.

Over time, the AppArmor profile may need to be updated. Changes to the file do not automatically cause changes to the version that has been installed in the OS. When significant changes have been made to the profile, you'll need to re-install the profile. This can be done by passing ``--replace`` instead of ``--add``, like so: ``sudo apparmor_parser --replace -W ./codejail.profile``

Development
***********

Changes to the AppArmor profile must be coordinated with changes to the Dockerfile, as they need to agree on filesystem paths.

> Any time you update the profile, you'll need to update the profile in your OS as well: ``sudo apparmor_parser --replace -W ./codejail.profile``

Reviewer: Something like this?
```suggestion
Any time you update the profile file, you'll need to update the profile in your OS as well: ``sudo apparmor_parser --replace -W ./codejail.profile``
```
